Spec: Clarify time travel implementation in Iceberg (#8982)
apache/iceberg: format/spec.md

    * `sort_columns` was removed

Note that these requirements apply when writing data to a v2 table. Tables that are upgraded from v1 may contain metadata that does not follow these requirements. Implementations should remain backward-compatible with v1 metadata requirements.

> ## Appendix F: Implementation Notes

Reviewer: I am a bit hesitant on adding an "implementation notes" section to the spec. 

I am wondering if time travel clarification should be added to the `snapshots` section of the spec?

Author: I can move it there.

Reviewer 2: I like this approach. I don't think that the spec mandates this time travel behavior, but it is what implementations should do to be consistent with one another. Seems like "Implementation notes" is a good place for this kind of thing.

Author: @stevenzwu @rdblue @ajantha-bhat  not sure if either of you have more strongly held preference on this, happy to do it either way.

Reviewer 3: Maybe we should call it Implementation Suggestions, or Suggested Behaviors?

I'm fine with it being a separate section

Reviewer: I can see Ryan's point. I can withdraw my argument.

Reviewer 4: Just wondering why can't we mandate this in spec? because it is optional field? We can use "if exists" while mandating in the spec?

Also, we have implementation suggetions like  "File System Tables" and "Metastore tables" in the spec. So, can we have a "Time Travel" section for this?

Author: @ajantha-bhat I think the two sections you described above are required for writers/readers for proper functionality.  As per above this is not required for correctness but allows for consistency on implementation.

This section covers topics not required by the specification but recommendations for systems implementing the Iceberg specification
to help maintain a uniform experience.

### Point in Time Reads (Time Travel)

> Iceberg supports two types of histories for tables. A history of previous "current snapshots" stored ["snapshot-log" table metadata](#table-metadata-fields) and [parent-child lineage stored in "snapshots"](#table-metadata-fields). These two histories 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Iceberg supports two types of histories for tables. A history of previous "current snapshots" stored in ["snapshot-log" table metadata](#table-metadata-fields) and [parent-child lineage stored in "snapshots"](#table-metadata-fields). These two histories 
```

> Iceberg supports two types of histories for tables. A history of previous "current snapshots" stored in ["snapshot-log" table metadata](#table-metadata-fields) and [parent-child lineage stored in "snapshots"](#table-metadata-fields). These two histories 

Reviewer 6: What is exactly meant by `two histories might not be consistent for determining a table state`?

Author: tried to clarify.  please let me know if this reads better.

Reviewer 7: Gentle ping @aokolnychyi

Reviewer: > The discrepancies can be caused by a variety of table operations (e.g. updating the `current-snapshot-id` of the table).

might be better to further clarify the discrepancy. this wasn't super clear to me.

Author: I added more lanugage here, please let me know if it addresses the concerns.

> might not be consistent for determining a table states at a given point in time due to a variety of table operations (e.g. branch-merge table workflows OR forcing the current state of table to specific snapshot ID).

Reviewer 6: Typo: `a table states` -> `a table state`?

Author: should be fixed now.

> might indicate different snapshot IDs for a specific timestamp. The discrepencies can be caused by a variety of table operations (e.g. branch-merge table workflows or forcing the current state of table to specific snapshot ID).

Reviewer 7: I think this explains it all, after reading the comment https://github.com/apache/iceberg/pull/5364#issuecomment-1227902420:
```suggestion
might indicate different snapshot IDs for a specific timestamp. The discrepancies can be caused by a variety of table operations (e.g. updating the `current-snapshot-id` of the table).
```

> When processing point in time queries the Iceberg community has chosen to use "snapshot-log" metadata to lookup the table state

Reviewer: nit: maybe `For point in time queries, "snapshot-log" metadata are used to lookup the table state at the given point of time`?

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure we would say "the iceberg community has chosen." If we write it into the spec that's redundant. Also this isn't an implementation note though if we are telling folks to do this.

Reviewer 2: I agree with Russell, but I would not block this clarification from going in. @RussellSpitzer, is this a blocker for you? If so could you note it on the vote thread? I'm going to vote +1, but we should wait until you're satisfied.

Author: I'll rephrase when I move it under snapshots.

Reviewer 8: +1 for removing "the Iceberg community has chosen to", the spec should not involve the community, we can just describe what should be done.

Reviewer 9: imho, spec should not contain "community has chosen": the spec should only focus on what's expected.

Reviewer 10: @emkornfield can you address this before merging?

Author: Yes, I will do so.  I'd like to try to come to a resolution on https://github.com/apache/iceberg/pull/8982#discussion_r1678756567 so we can finalize in outstanding items in one commit.

Reviewer 3: I voted +1 on the email thread. I would like this cleaned up though before we do the final merge.

Reviewer 4: Since it is an optional field may be we should add "if exists" for "snapshot-log"?

Reviewer 11: I think this recommendation affects REST catalog implementations.

I believe this text is not normative, therefore REST catalog implementations that do not expose the full snapshot history in metadata JSON will not violate the spec. 

However, for the sake of clarity and considering that the field is option, I propose adding a phrase like "when the catalog makes the snapshot history available in the metadata JSON, time travel queries should be executed like this.... [existing spec text]. If a catalog does not expose the full snapshot history, time travel queries should provide clear messages in case they cannot find the appropriate snapshot".

Author: IIUC conformant REST catalogs as of now must have a link to require the JSON metadata file to be present, so I don't think this directly reflects them.  If REST catalogs do not have a first class REST API for retrieving this information (or a way to parameterize the API via a timestamp to get the metadata) that seems like a new feature for the REST catalog, which is out of scope.  Hopefully the proposal to remove the requirement for JSON metadata  file is not approved until issues like this are sorted out.

Reviewer 11: @emkornfield : my comment above is not about the retrieval of the JSON metadata itself (which must be supported), but about the (optional) `snapshot-log` field in the JSON payload returned by a REST Catalog server.

Reviewer 2: This spec is independent of the REST catalog protocol. The protocol covers how to exchange table information covered by this spec, but this spec covers how to track that information and, in this case, recommendations for how that information is used. In the context of your suggestion, this assumes that "when the catalog makes the snapshot history available in the metadata JSON" is all the time. It is always true because this spec defines the metadata JSON.

I think it is valuable to say that engines are encouraged to use the information from `snapshot-log` for time travel by timestamp so that the results match what a query would have seen at that time. We made that choice for Spark because we think that is what users expect.

Reviewer 11: `snapshot-log` is optional in both v1 and v2 spec: https://iceberg.apache.org/spec/#table-metadata-fields

Given that this PR suggests how engines should process that information so that users can expect similar behaviour from different engines, it would be nice to provide a suggestion of how to deal with missing `snapshot-log` in a common way too. In other words, how to produce a user-friendly message as opposed to some internal and engine-specific error.

Author: Added sentence mentioning an informative message being raised to the user about missing metadata.  I also tried to rephrased to remove the the iceberg community. If further word-smithing is desired, suggestions are welcome.

Reviewer 11: Thanks for the update @emkornfield - current text LGTM :+1:

> When processing point in time queries the Iceberg community has chosen to use "snapshot-log" metadata to lookup the table state

Reviewer 4: > has chosen to use "snapshot-log" metadata to lookup the table state

But isn't it an optional field in the spec? 
https://github.com/apache/iceberg/pull/8982

What if the implementations of spec doesn't maintain the "snapshot-log" history?

Reviewer 2: If you don't have this information, then time travel to a specific time would fail because you don't know what the state of the table was at that time. It should definitely not change to use the parent/child relationship because the time travel behavior could be inconsistent depending on how the log is maintained.

Reviewer 4: Ack.

Author: Added a sentence stating an informative error message should be raised.

> When processing point in time queries the Iceberg community has chosen to use "snapshot-log" metadata lookup the table state

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
When processing point in time queries the Iceberg community has chosen to use "snapshot-log" metadata to lookup the table state
```
